This free program is paid for by the listeners of Redwood Community Radio.
If you're not already a member, please think of joining us. Thank you.
... probably including chemtrails.
Tune in and call in this Sunday at 1.30 p.m. to Edge of the Herd.
Keep your heads up.
And support for KMUD comes in part from Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup,
an anti-inflammatory, anti-fungal, antibacterial, antioxidant medicine made without heat or ice.
Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup is organic, edible, topical, cosmetic, and water-soluble.
Information is available at goldendragonmedicinalsyrup@gmail.com
and by phone at 707-223-1539.
And as always, the views and opinions expressed throughout the broadcast air
are those of the speakers and not necessarily those of the station, its staff, or underwriters.
Time will be made available for other viewpoints.
Thank you for joining us.
And, you know, for the record, that was not my view.
They made me say that, and I think that is the one thing that the station does have as its own view,
is that the views are yours.
Anyway, here comes...
Ask Your Doctor.
[Music]
Well, welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor.
My name's Andrew Murray.
My name's Sarah Johannison Murray.
For those of you who perhaps have never listened to our shows,
which run every third Friday of the month from 7 till 8 p.m.,
we are both licensed medical herbalists who trained in England
and graduated there with a degree in herbal medicine.
We run a clinic in Garboville where we consult with clients about a wide range of conditions,
and we manufacture all our own certified organic herbal extracts,
which are either grown on our CCF certified herb farm,
or which are sourced from other USA certified organic suppliers.
So you're listening to Ask Your Herb Doctor on KMUD, Garboville, 91.1 FM,
and from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock,
you're invited to call in with any questions, either related or unrelated,
to this month's mixed topic of hormone replacement therapy,
estrogen, along with the inflammatory effects of estrogen,
as well as some other popularly accepted hormones like serotonin, melatonin, and 5-HTP,
so we can discuss the roles of those particular materials in our bodies
and why they're not actually that good for us.
So once again, we're very pleased to be joined by Dr. Ray Peat,
who will be sharing his research and knowledge surrounding these topics.
The number here, if you live in the area, is 923 3911,
or if you live outside the area, the toll-free number is 1-800-KMUD-RAD.
That's 1-800-568-3723.
We can also be reached toll-free on 1-888-WBM-ERB for further questions
during normal business hours, Monday through Friday.
So science, whilst responsible for many excellent breakthroughs,
is unfortunately subject to the same scandals that beset many excellent thoughts.
While studying physiology myself, I, like many others,
was subject to what I now understand as an indoctrination, if you will,
into an erroneous state of pseudo-fact,
and that one of those things was the receptor model used in physiology,
with one particular hormone, namely estrogen,
which will be the subject, partly at least, of tonight's discussion with Dr. Peat,
this being a perpetrator of much deceit on the behalf of Big Pharma.
Why was HRT so promoted and how did the truth behind estrogen effects get so covered up?
Well, this question and many other answers will be opened up in tonight's Ask Your Herb Doctor,
including the facts surrounding the melatonin, serotonin, 5-HT craze.
So thank you once again, Dr. Peat, for joining us on the show.
OK.
Again, as always, we always get comments from people after the show.
I know a lot of people that listen to the show have either emailed us or contacted us
regarding information that you've been sharing
and how they can get hold of more information so they can be a little bit better informed.
Now, as usual, some people will have tuned into the show and maybe have never heard of you.
Would you just open up with your background, your scientific background?
OK. As a kid, I was interested in science, but I would read old medical books and encyclopedias and such.
And I very early got the impression that education was largely indoctrination.
And I found that literature as an undergraduate was a field where I could see the actual evidence,
the material that we were studying without interpretation of the professors.
So it was years and years later that I finally decided to go to graduate school in science
when I realized that I could get through it without having to fight with the professors.
I could just be quiet and do what I wanted to do.
So I enrolled at the University of Oregon in the biology department,
starting as specializing in nerve biology.
I was interested in how the brain could do things like handling language and images and such.
And I saw that the whole direction of the brain biology was towards a very reductionist computer analogy.
And looking around the department, I saw that the other end of the organism,
the reproductive physiology, was much more scientific.
And so I shifted over to that specialization.
My professor, if I would get unusual results, would say, "Well, if it's repeatable, just go ahead."
But in the nerve biology section, if the results or the interpretation were a little off,
you had to throw away the evidence.
Okay, well that word "indoctrination" I think is a very good place to start tonight's expose.
I know the scandal surrounding HRT that was kind of revealed as it were mainstream not too long ago
is a very good place to begin tonight's talk.
In terms of indoctrination and the models that were so popular then and probably still are now,
when I was studying the whole receptor-ligand interaction was just dogmatic
and a particular compound elicited a particular effect when it was bound to an enzyme or to a cell,
that surrounding estrogen, the estrogen receptor,
you actually have a very good understanding of the background enzymatically,
how it was before it was taken over by...
And unfortunately, I know it's another conspiracy as it were,
but it's the truth in terms of pre-1940s with the enzyme...
The people studying enzyme interactions were then effectively taken over by Big Pharma
and corporate manufacture for want of increase from their products
and the whole estrogen receptor is a bit of a non-entity, I understand.
Yeah, it was 1970 when I was working on my dissertation
and I was studying the metabolism of the uterus in aging animals
and trying to understand why in middle age infertility came about
and the particular metabolic studies that I was doing
corresponded to increased estrogenic stimulation with aging
and that led me, since all of the current textbooks in the 1960s
were saying that menopause is when the ovaries wear out and stop producing estrogen.
So I read way back to about 1900 and up to the 1940s and '50s
and I saw there was a sudden change in 1942 all through the 1930s
when my thesis advisor was a student into the 1940s.
His thesis advisor was Richard Blandau
who was later at the University of Washington Medical School
and Soderwald and Blandau were among the people who were studying
the effects of excess estrogen on the uterus
and they showed that if you gave a greater dose,
increasing amounts of estrogen caused miscarriage at earlier
and the smallest dose would cause miscarriage at a very early stage
and if you waited until very late in the pregnancy it would take a bigger dose
but it was a very continuous graded effect
in which the estrogen, slight excess, would be sufficient to kill the developing embryo
and this was going on all through the late 1930s into the 1940s
and the hormones of the ovary were identified in the mid-1930s
as the very major substance produced in the ovary was progesterone
and estrogen was a minor substance
and it turned out that other people doing research on how estrogen worked at this time
saw that soot, just put a spoon in a candle flame and then extract it in a solvent
you could get hundreds of different estrogenic substances out of just soot
and this was wonderful for the drug industries because everyone could find an estrogen patent
but there was only one natural progesterone and so that was not a viable drug
because no one had a patent on it
so by 1942 the 13 major estrogen companies had their synthetic estrogens
and the situation scientifically was that estrogen caused infertility
and was associated with aging
but since they had products they said here we have the female hormone
and being female means being able to have babies
and so estrogen must be what causes women to have babies
and they wanted to sell it for some popular use
so they could sell it to millions of women
and they came up with the idea that it would prevent miscarriage
even though the science said the opposite
and they got a teen man and wife at Harvard to promote the idea that diethylstilbestrol, D.E.S.
D.E.S. which is just awful
yeah, that it would prevent miscarriages
and so they were prescribing it for years to women to prevent miscarriage
and to make a healthier baby and so on
and it turned out, well probably they never would have had to stop selling it
even though it was causing cancer and deformity
but about the same time it was getting recognized that D.E.S. causes cancer
and doesn't prevent miscarriage but actually increases the risk
they were getting interested in a new product to sell to even more women
the birth control pill
so when they decided that the time was right
in the 1940s they didn't want their drug company known as the abortion producer
but by 1959 or 60 abortion was becoming, or contraception was becoming acceptable
but still abortion was a taboo
so they invented a story saying that if you take estrogen it will suppress your body's estrogen
and prevent miscarriage by lowering your estrogen
and so they came out with the contraceptive so called abortion pill
just as it was recognized that D.E.S. was causing miscarriages and cancer
so they lost one product but immediately came out with another falsified story
to sell the birth control pill
in terms of the dogma behind receptor physiology
what is the truth behind whether or not estrogen binds to a specific receptor
and the lies surrounding the so called science that was produced in order to support the estrogen industry
these people who were doing the real science were trying to explain why estrogen had these toxic effects
and they thought that natural estrogen was imitated by these polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in soot
which were famous and recognized as carcinogens
and estrogen was known to be carcinogenic
and so they were studying the properties of soot and estrogen
and finding that given estrogenic properties
the substance was also intended to produce inflammation and cancer
which is a very close association electronically in the nature of the molecule
and these were activating enzyme systems in particular ways
according to the exact nature of that inflammatory carcinogenic estrogenic electronic configuration
and this was reaching a peak in the 1950s
and the government moved some of their investment from chemical warfare into endocrine research
the opinion of many people is that the intention was to use it for population control
and that the Nazis had been using estrogen on people in slave camps and such
but the US government got very interested in estrogen after the second world war
and they gave a big grant to a group
it's an ongoing tradition of a group associated with the University of Chicago, Michigan and Lawrence
Livermore Radiation Lab and UC Berkeley
the project that was funded for Elwood Jensen was the leader of it
he had been working in chemical warfare
and wanted to create a new idea for how estrogen worked
that would not involve all of this interesting chemistry
which explained why estrogen was a very intense toxin, a carcinogen
he wanted to say that all it does is activate the female genes
that women are characterized by having a uterus and breasts
and the function of these is governed by their genes, their female genes
and these genes are activated in their particular organs
and estrogen somehow turning a switch that would only activate those female genes
and not involve all of this nasty chemistry of cancer and inflammation
but they knew that soot caused cancer in the late 1800s from the chimney sweeps
but that was exactly what Jensen wanted people to forget
just forget all of this enzymology and chemistry that people have been working on
which in such elegant ways showed the similarities of the carcinogens and estrogens
but he wanted to say that it's like a lock and key
the female organs have a very specific lock
and the estrogen is the key that sticks only into that lock
estrogen receptors are now known to be found all throughout the body right?
and in men
but at that time the real science was thinking of the whole cell and the whole organism
as the responsive unit to things like estrogen
but Elwood Jensen would, he was arguing that there was just one little switch molecule in the cell
which would neatly turn on only the female genes
and so it wouldn't have the possibility of any of these other actions
the defense department funded, well the atomic energy commission gave him permission to use radioactive isotopes
and supplied the isotopes
and other labs, his competition didn't have either the grants or the isotopes
they were very tightly controlled by the atomic energy commission
and he labeled estrogen and found that it concentrated in organs like the uterus
and since the enzymologists were saying that it affects the whole energy system of the organism and the cell
changing the oxidation reduction processes and participating in the chemistry of the cell
he labeled two different kinds of estrogen, put labels in two different places
and added them to the uterine tissue and said that there was no interchange between the two
there were no oxidative reactions in which estrogen participated
and he published that I think it was 1962
and that the enzymologists had been, the whole thing was based on estrogen participating as a chemical reactant
and he had the only means by which to demonstrate what he claimed
so his opponents didn't have the grants or the isotopes to challenge that
to disprove it, because the research up until that point had been showing that estrogen causes cancer
but the drug companies after 1942 wanted to sell the oral contraceptive pill, they wanted to sell DES
which is known to cause cancer for generations later and the babies of the mothers who took it
and now HRT, so we're talking about three different majorly used drugs that they knew caused cancer
and doctors are still prescribing them today
and some of the particular enzymes involved in cancer and estrogen function were well known to the enzymologists
and Elwood Jensen's group said no they don't use the fancy isotope demonstration
to say no they don't participate, they're not oxidized and reused
but 10 or 15 years later after the receptor dogma had been imposed on the world of biology
other people started using isotopes and showing that yes the older enzymologists were exactly right
estrogen does participate as a catalyst in enzyme reactions
especially trans-hydrogenation reactions that connect energy production to gene turnover and cell growth and so on
so that's how it initiates cancer cells?
yes, it allows the energy to be short circuited over into the growth rather than the function mechanism
so the cell stops functioning and doing its normal cellular functioning and just the estrogen turns on the cell growth processes?
yes, it drains the energy right out of function into growth
very scary
ok one sec, you're listening to Ask Your Herb Doctor on KMED Galbraithville 91.1 FM
from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions
either related or unrelated to this month's topic or mixed topics of estrogen, DHT, serotonin
and those hormones that are particularly bandied around by doctors and the mainstream as being helpful and beneficial
when in fact the science is there quite clearly to say the opposite
and we are very privileged to be joined by Dr. Raymond Peat who has many years of research under his belt
to just tell us all about it
so Dr. Peat, again I'm interested about the, because I know that I've mentioned this in the past
and I think you brought it up on one of the previous shows
about water, water, H2O as we know it, is not just straightforward water
and I read some alchemical treaties about the way they would capture lightning water
or water that was subjected to fall out during storms
and how this water was energetically more active
and actually modern science has shown that H2O exists in many different states
and there is a very different mechanism by which water can act cellulally or intracellularly
and I'm interested from a point of view of what we're talking about now with estrogen involved in redox reactions
how that actually comes out in terms of its cancer promoting
well the fastest change that you can see in a cell within a minute or two of exposing it to estrogen
is that it just instantly starts taking up water
and as it takes up water, the water gets out of the cells control
and that's part of this short circuiting the energy process
the microtubules that are an organizing force in the cell
that lets it do the work it's supposed to
these are depolymerized in the presence of estrogen and disorganized
and that's part of the cancer problem that the cell can't communicate from one part to the other
because the microtubules are messed up
and the division process even can reach the point where it can't separate the chromosomes evenly
and then you get imbalance of chromosomes making the cancer degenerate
the water is normally under control of adjoining surfaces
so that it's very unlike bulk water but in the presence of estrogen it becomes bulk like
so that one of my experiments at the university was to put an old uterus
a young uterus and an estrogen treated uterus in an MRI machine
and we could show that the old uterus and the estrogen treated uterus had loose water
disorganized water that could be distinguished from the young healthy uterus
interesting, ok, it's coming up close to 7.30 so I just want to let people know that
from any time on people are welcome to call in with questions related or unrelated to this month's show
so far as other hormones are concerned the whole hormone replacement therapy
just give me your opinion of the HRT's effects and why it was eventually taken out
well, still not taken out, people still, it's not as popular
in England there's a big backlash against it
the industry succeeded so greatly in turning science completely upside down in the case of estrogen
that that took a lot of other hormones with it
progesterone was suppressed and ignored because it would cure the things that estrogen was claimed to cure
and it couldn't be patented as you said
yeah, and prolactin had many toxic effects that were well recognized
but since estrogen increases prolactin there was a great pressure not to think very much about what it means
that prolactin causes bone loss and contributes to osteoporosis
but it wasn't popular to think of the fact that estrogen increases prolactin
and serotonin is another thing that has been strongly influenced by this inverted interpretation of estrogen
because estrogen increases exposure to serotonin
serotonin is one of the means by which estrogen increases prolactin
and serotonin does many of the harmful things that estrogen and prolactin do
including a direct cause of bone loss
people who take the fluoxetine type of antidepressants
are seen to have a lot of premature bone loss because of the excess exposure to serotonin
and the associated prolactin
and serotonin is in a way kind of a co-factor for estrogen
estrogen increases serotonin systemically and serotonin in turn increases the production of estrogen
so when one gets out of control they both tend to become dominant
and serotonin is involved in the inflammations produced by estrogen
well we're all told that serotonin is the feel good hormone
and they give you SSRIs
yeah they give you antidepressant selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
so you can feel better
so it's more present in the circulation
and so it's just the same brainwashing they're trying to do to us like they did with the estrogen
saying estrogen prevents bone loss when actually it causes bone loss
so serotonin helps your depression and in fact has all these negative side effects
of increased bone loss, increased estrogen levels, increased risk of cancer
yeah one of the currently bad effects of serotonin excess is getting some recognition
even though in the 1950s all of the bad features of serotonin were recognized in a disease involving tumors in the intestine
that produced too much serotonin
but in just the last 2 or 3 years the hypertension of the pulmonary artery is being seen to be caused by serotonin
and the drugs that increase serotonin increase this pulmonary hypertension
and degeneration of the valves in the right side of the heart
this was known in the 1950s as the main deadly complication of having that serotonin producing tumor
but finally 60 years later it's being recognized as a way to treat pulmonary hypertension by using anti-serotonin drugs
gosh, ok we do actually have a caller on the line Dr. Peat
yes, I sometimes have a tendency toward depression
and I like to do more natural things when I can and stay away from the hard drugs when I can
so I resisted trying if you like Zoloft or Prozac or any of that
but I was told by some nature doctors to try 5-HTP
matter of fact I was told by another couple of people that I inquired that had depression
and they said that this 5-HTP was something natural that would help you use your own serotonin better
and be more like kind of a natural Prozac
now are you telling me that that is not good for you?
that that's going to make you either make more, does it make you make more serotonin or utilize what you have better?
the Prozac type drugs keep the platelets and nerve cells from binding and keeping serotonin out of the way
and so they lead to overexposure to the serotonin
are you familiar with 5-HTP?
that's what you get at the health food store, that's supposed to be like an amino acid
yeah, plain tryptophan is bad enough but the 5-hydroxy tryptophan is one step closer to being serotonin
so you think that it's not good for me to take it?
everything that I know suggests that for example there's increased risk of breast cancer and obesity and many bad effects
how can it increase obesity?
by slowing metabolism and suppressing thyroid
5-HTP does that?
the antidepressants?
I don't mean like Prozac, I'm just talking about 5-HTP
it hasn't been studied as much as the antidepressants but it works to raise your serotonin
it's basically providing you the precursor in your body makes more serotonin out of it
so the effects of serotonin in excess are going to be increasing estrogen which slows your liver's metabolism
that can slow your thyroid down, that can lead to obesity, by increasing estrogen it can promote cancer
Janet says it elevates your mood
well you have to weigh it up, it might elevate your mood but you also risk these other things
they used to give x-rays to help with psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis
oh whoopsie daisy, sorry you got cancer, my aunt had a lot of x-ray treatment for her acne on her back
and she had a terrible form of breast cancer which turned into bone cancer and she died at the age of 50
well I certainly don't want to slow my metabolism or my thyroid down or any of that
I've done with the menopause thing so I figure my estrogen has balanced itself out and I've never taken the replacement
it seems like he's not talking about how it became so outrageously popular for women with menopause
the little pink pills, the HRT, hormone replacement therapy that everybody was taking because they didn't like having hot flashes
and other things that would move the swings and menopause symptoms
but my approach was that it was a natural occurrence and so it didn't really need to be medically changed
I just feel I had a symptom that was bad enough that I needed medical intervention
maybe I was just lucky and I had mild symptoms although I did have a lot of hot flashes
but it was only the last maybe 4 or 5 years that it's been suggested that I take this 5-HTP as if it was like on rest
I mean I don't need to increase my serotonin if it's going to slow down my thyroid and up my estrogen and be bad for my heart valve
that's right
so that's all the things that she said it did right?
yeah and it's not again because Dr. Peat has spent his life researching things and doing research on even the articles
is this faulty science? is this promoted by a drug company? who did this research?
when he says that it's not him saying that as though it's his own opinion he's adopted that opinion from researching the evidence
what causes it?
I just want to say again that I'm not talking about the Prozac or the Zoloft or the pharmaceutical serotonin drugs
I'm specifically talking about 5-HTP which you get at the health food store where it seems like it's this benign thing that can't hurt you
I know but it's all part of the same system
yeah sure Prozac might increase your serotonin to a much higher degree than taking 5-HTP
but it's all working on that same system and if a little bit is that the body naturally produces in the bowel
because your bowel naturally produces serotonin and if a little bit is stimulating inflammation and degeneration
then you wouldn't want to increase that even through natural means
yeah so I should probably do without it and see if my food is okay anyway and just have a stiff upper lip right?
yeah sounds like a good idea
thank you
I think unfortunately what comes out time and time again is that the short term is certainly not worth the price of the long term sequelae of disease processes
and I think most people, I think us all included, we only really see the short term unless we delve into the facts
it's like with fish oils and people's inflammation, it can relieve inflammation to some degree
but you also run the risk of suppressing your immune system and damaging your liver in the meantime
so I think what gets brought out more and more is that the long term risks are certainly very evident and very prevalent
and that people, what we're doing here with this show and other previous shows is just highlighting the long term risks
and so unfortunately most people don't understand the long term risks and only the short term gain is I think what fuels most people's desires to be on certain drugs
but there is a lot of long term risks associated with it and I think Dr. Peat is doing an excellent job of bringing these facts out
because it's already there in terms of science articles
okay there's two more callers on the line
hello
hi you're on the air
hi Dr. Peat this is wonderful
I've talked to you before and I've gotten completely off of my serotonin reuptake inhibitors
and I wanted to say that I read a bunch of articles on your site
and I have to tell you that one effect of stopping taking these Prozac and these serotonin things
is that I've now been able to stop taking, using steroids in an inhaler
my asthma has gone away completely
alright well done
and I just wanted to make sure that I read your website right because I think you said there that it does relate, serotonin does relate to asthma
and nobody ever told me that but I'm completely off my inhaler
and it's only been a month so I just wanted to tell you that and ask a question about that
yeah it does several things related to asthma
estrogen is related to asthma too
and the effect of the serotonin is to cause localized contraction of the tubes in your lungs as well as causing them to take up water and promote some inflammation
but the contraction is the thing that's best studied in connection with asthma
well thank you so much that's really interesting because it went away within like four weeks
I wasn't having the breathing problems
the first week or so I coughed up a lot of liquid but then after that it just quit
so anyway thank you very much and I'm going to keep reading your website for articles thank you
that's great you coughed out the asthma
I don't know what I coughed out but I just coughed up a lot of fluid for like a week but after that it just cleared up and I stopped using the inhaler and I'm not using it anymore and I'm just really grateful
fantastic news
getting off the serotonin was painful but after I'm off of it now for almost two months so I have to be I'm very grateful so thank you for the information
thank you for your call
good well there we go that's another glaring example of what we hear frequently
so yeah if you want to listen to Dr. Peat truth is out there if you open your ears
okay there's another caller
hey hello I came in a little bit late to the discussion but I haven't really heard mention of the three different types of estrogen in our bodies
they have a hugely disparate impact on our bodies and I think that that's really germane to this conversation so please inform us of that
there are probably a dozen important types of estrogen but almost all of them the three main types estriol, estrone and estradiol those are the best known and have been used as drugs
those all have pretty much the same effects but just at different potencies so that if you can turn your most potent estradiol into the others you're protected against some of the most toxic effects of estrogen
during pregnancy enzymes are detoxifying estrogen by many different routes but the index of a healthy pregnancy is when the estriol is high because that means you're destroying your estradiol very quickly
so the estradiol is the most dangerous form and that's usually what I recommend women have tested to make sure their most dangerous form is not too high
and these different forms are exactly the issue that Elwood Jensen denied happened he said estradiol can't turn into estrone and estriol but in fact that's a major way of either activating or inactivating estrogen according to the cell's energy system
so the only reason you'd want high estriol is because that would tell us that the estradiol is being detoxified not that high estriol in itself is protective in any way shape or form
yeah it's about ten times weaker than estrogen so every little bit of estradiol that you turn to estriol it's a down stepping of your estrogen effect
so I'm not sure that's the answer that lady was looking for
okay well there's two more callers on the line so
hi thank you so much for having me on the show it's really interesting
I had a question about modern birth control methods and your opinion of them in terms of how safe they are things such as the pill or the Nuvaring and just in terms of I know that those still have levels of estrogen and do you recommend those as safe contraceptives or do you think that those are still dangerous to your health and I can take my question off the air thank you
tremendously decrease the amount of estrogen in the contraceptives but if it's strong enough to kill the embryo it's strong enough to do some damage to the woman
and about 30 years ago there was quite a bit of agitation among women's groups for FDA approval of the traditional cervical cap which the ideal thing was made by a metal worker or a dentist with a metal casting outfit
they would use a dental mold making material to get an exact impression of the cervix and then they would cast silver or gold or some inactive metal in the shape of the cervix and it would form a vacuum seal and it could be used could be left in place weeks at a time
and under the pressure from the women's groups the FDA gave its approval to a rubber so called cervical cap which was actually shaped more like a baby bottle's nipple with a huge projection chamber on the end which was supposed to be filled with spermicidal goo
and that immense structural projection caused it to almost instantly be displaced and so they were terribly unsuccessful it was just like a way of inserting a spermicidal cream or jelly
but the FDA approved that but wouldn't approve the one that actually worked because I think it was because they were simply working for the contraceptive pill industry
and then as far as IUD they now have IUDs that have hormone that secrete a small amount of hormone inside the uterine cavity so that would be the similar situation
yeah the signal from inside the uterus travels through nerves and other conduction up the fallopian tube to prevent the ovary from producing the amount of progesterone that it should
so any kind of IUD with or without hormones will create a hormonal imbalance which is what is the main thing accounting for the prevention of pregnancy
and then thereby increasing your estrogen and increasing risk of cancer
yeah
so the only the one possible safe method of contraception would be the silver or the gold
but they don't make those
they don't make them
is there anything else other than natural birth control
rhythm or method
fertility awareness method
not too much else
yeah I think the rhythm cycle method is the best
yeah good
another caller I think there's two more
hello you're on the air
caller are you there I think you have something playing in the background
well I guess we don't have another caller here so the lines are open so give us a call at 923 3911 and we'll continue on with Dr. Peat
okay that last call I guess is not there so Dr. Peat going on to the other hormones
we want to talk about melatonin
melatonin what do you think of melatonin
well it has its own endocrine problems it can disturb your progesterone and thyroid production if you take a lot of it
but its function seems to be as a way of detoxifying serotonin
the trigger that turns the conversion in the pineal gland of serotonin into melatonin
it's the adrenergic stress related nerves
during the night your stress increases from the lack of light
and this adrenergic system causes the pineal to convert serotonin to melatonin
and in general in various places melatonin is functioning as an antidote to serotonin
so biologically it's evidence that you're responding to stress with a detoxifying process
and the similar enzymes that exist in the pineal that are activated by the stress
can also be found in inflamed joint tissue and in breast cancer for example
and serotonin is involved in the pathology of both of those situations
so if our enzymes could turn it more quickly into melatonin then there would be less of a serotonin problem
but when people actually take melatonin
sometimes it's probably protecting against the circulating serotonin but in itself in an otherwise healthy person
for example in the animal studies it was capable of lowering both progesterone and thyroid while increasing estrogen
so in a short term emergency situation it could be okay but again long term it's going to have negative side effects
yeah, it depends probably on the person but it's much safer than serotonin
okay, alright we do have two more callers so we'll try to get through them if we can and see how we go
you're on the air?
yes
hi, you're on the air
hi, yeah I take a vagin... it's called Vagifem suppository and it's for dryness
but I just looked on the package and it says it's extra diol
so should I really worry about that because I did have a problem with pretty dry
okay, Dr. Peat what would you...
people have been studying who are using vaginal creams for example and their blood level of estrogen was even higher than some of the oral pills were causing
so it's definitely a systemic hormonal influence wherever you put it
right, so obviously if there's any familial... even if there isn't a familial history but especially if there is a familial history of any estrogen cancers so...
so Dr. Peat what would you recommend to this lady to use in place of her suppository?
I've known several women who had pharmacists make them up suppositories with a fairly high dose of vitamin A and a little vitamin E in cocoa butter or other way of introducing it
and the vitamin A helps to strengthen the membranes and normalize mucous production
okay
okay good, well that's a pretty...
and in the meantime if you can't find a pharmacist to make it...
yeah you can do that yourself
vitamin A, palmitate and vitamin E you can buy those capsules and try that
okay, well thank you very much
you're welcome, certainly sounds a lot safer than...
yeah
yeah, what you were using
okay good, there's another caller on the line
hello
hi, you're on the air
hi, what do you think of the bio-identical hormones in low dose?
hmm, very suspicious of people
that come from wild yams and...
well it depends which ones are they, estrogen or are they progesterone?
well they're the three estrogens but the estradiol is the lowest that you know that are compounded by women's international pharmacy but they're from soy and yam, wild yam
and there's no progesterone in there?
and progesterone also from vegetable sources as opposed to the synthetic or the animal estrogens that pharmaceutical companies use
so Dr. Peat what would you recommend to this lady?
well whether it's his opinion of the bio-identical hormones
well all of the hormones that are bio-identical can have, they have to fit into the system in a balanced way
and it's okay to have a physiological amount of any of these serotonin, estrogen, melatonin and so on
but when you supplement estrogen or serotonin you're most likely increasing something that's already excessive
the doctrine of replacement with the natural hormones is building on the history of the estrogen replacement with synthetic hormones
and what they neglect is that as a woman ages from age 19 to 39 for example
there's a steady average increase in the amount of estrogen in her blood stream
as well as a fairly continuous amount of progesterone which every cycle the estrogen is forced out of the cells all through the body
by the rising large amount of progesterone
and in the 40s progesterone production is no longer able to fully keep up with this steadily increasing estrogen production with aging
and as soon as estrogen, as soon as progesterone decreases and can no longer force estrogen out of the cells
the blood estrogen level will drop but the estrogen inside the cells will increase
publications by some, I think they're Norwegians, Batra and others
and by Richard Blandau in University of Washington showed that the tissues of old organisms retain much estrogen than the tissues of young animals
and the fact that you don't find it in the blood is simply because estrogen sticks inside the cells in proportion to the deficiency of progesterone
so that was probably the reason why they recommended it is because of low blood levels
and so Dr. Peat's advice would be to not use it
Okay, I'm being made aware that it is 2 minutes to 8 o'clock and the show does wrap up at 8 o'clock
so thank you for all those people that have called in
for anyone else who's listening who wants to find out more about Dr. Raymond Peat who's our special guest this month
his website is very informative, it's www.raypeat.com
Thank you so much Dr. Peat for joining us this evening
Okay, thank you
and for those listening we can be reached during normal business hours Monday through Friday
we have a number 1-888-WBM-ERB which is 1-888-926-4372
Okay, so until the same time next month 7-8 o'clock
thank you so much for listening and to those who have ears let them hear
Thank you
and support for KMUD comes in part from Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup
an anti-inflammatory, anti-fungal, antibacterial, antioxidant medicine made without heat or ice
Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup is organic, edible, topical, cosmetic and water soluble
Information available at goldendragonmedicinalsyrup@gmail.com
and by phone at 707-223-1569
We are KMUD Garberville 91.1 FM
KMUE Eureka Arcata 88.3 FM
KLAI Laytonville 90.3 FM
and FM translator K258BQ Shelter Cove 99.1 FM
Please remember that this program is supported by the listener members of Redwood Community Radio
If you like what you hear, please consider becoming a member of KMUD
or renewing if you've already joined
A regular yearly membership is $50 but we accept any amount
Help us keep free speech alive
Please remember that this program is supported by the listener members of Redwood Community Radio
If you like what you hear, please consider becoming a member of KMUD
or renewing if you've already joined
A regular yearly membership is $50 but we accept any amount
Help us keep free speech alive
Please remember that this program is supported by the listener members of Redwood Community Radio
If you like what you hear, please consider becoming a member of KMUD
or renewing if you've already joined
A regular yearly membership is $50 but we accept any amount
Help us keep free speech alive